talk about rag and sort of where the
direction it's going and a gentic search
uh how I see the picture evolving sort
of where we've been and the clean break
that we're making from uh from the past
I think with aentic search. So that's
going to be a new thing that we're going
to talk about today. For those of you
who don't know me, my name is Doug
Turnbull. I'm basically software Doug
everywhere. There's my website. Uh I do
retrieval consulting. I do a lot of
training and uh I've advised and worked
at probably hundreds of companies from
Wikipedia to Reddit to Shopify as a
consultant or as an employee. I built
some of the early rag systems that or
helped build the search behind a lot of
the early rag systems at Reddit and
Shopify. I recently worked at a fashion
AI startup, Daydream. I've done this a
couple of times now and you know I've
written a bunch of books. There's a
bunch of logos. If you if you want to
get to know me, definitely head to
softwarede.com.
Uh I always like to talk about what's
coming. Uh I like to keep my Maven
channel full of interesting talks. We're
going to have next week, many people may
know Joe Christian Bergam. Uh I think I
may have misspelled his name now that I
see that. And he's the CEO of Hornet.
He's well known for being a
uh sort of common person that you see
and he's well known for being sort of
like from Vespa the search engine and
has has maybe gotten a reputation as the
BM25 guy from that perspective and now
he's becoming more and more agentically
focused. He works now at a c at a aentic
search startup called Hornet. And Hornet
is interesting because uh yeah, it's
entirely built a search engine entirely
built for agents as the main user, not
humans. So I think that's really
interesting. So we're going to have a
great conversation next week.
Um and then in a couple weeks there's a
great in-person conference down about a
mile from my house actually in Virginia
called Haystack. If you want to find
just a great conference on retrieval and
search, you can't do much better than
this. I know a lot of people here will
already be there. I'll be there. A lot
of other great people will be there.
Many people may know Trey Granger. He'll
be there as well. So, definitely come
hang out with us. Uh that's May 5th
through 7th. Um
I am going to be teaching a course uh
and the link got kind of hidden here
uh for called cheatet search essentials.
This is a free course I do before I
teach my paid course which is all about
agentic search. This free course is just
a really great time to come and learn if
you want to come get like the basics
explain like I'm five perspective on
search. Definitely encourage people to
come check it out.
Um, yeah. And then finally, I have my
live training coming up in May, May
18th, about a month away. We and we're
it's all about the stuff we're going to
talk about today. Basically, from rag to
agentic search. Uh, and that comes in
lots of flavors. There's lots of
components to that from building
harnesses that search up to the actual
retrieval part of the equation. I think
this agentic search space is basically
going to be in 2026. It already is the
main thing people talk about when they
talk about information retrieval. It's
uh it's what embeddings were to the late
20110s or so.
Um
it's a pretty consistent finding.
This is why if you're if you're an AI
person, I like to always have these
quotes why you should care about search.
I mean the most consistent finding and
you'll see these quotes all over the
place. One of the most consistent
findings in the research is just that
retrieval and search really drive the
quality of uh AI systems.
So that's and you can see it. This is
like a data point you can get over and
over again. And we're actually seeing
more data points because it's still true
with a Gentic search. uh no retrieval
retrieval added retrieval optimized like
you can get like 2x improvement just by
improving the retrieval quality. This is
classic rag. There's some nuance to this
with aentic search that we're going to
talk about because agents can
participate in their own search in a way
that classic rag was not
was not able to.
So today we're going to talk about
information retrieval. We're going to
talk about the progression from
uh from sort of this question answering
era that we all know and love into the
rag era. And then I would argue the
cleanest break comes when we're adding a
gentic search to the top to the to the
world. When agents come around, it's
actually a fairly clean break from this
and the rag era. And we're going to talk
about that a bit later.
So, back in my day when we talked about
AI, we really were talking about things
like this. Uh, the Google answer box to
us was magic. This was like the late
2010s, what we meant AI, what we thought
AI was.
Um, and
I uh
uh I find it interesting that,
you know, the definition of AI continues
to change and change. uh as we as we go
on.
So this is the sort of like we would
just the fact that we could sort of do
this thing where we could figure out the
similarity between a query and a
passage. This is an interesting case
because it doesn't necessarily go with
how we typically think of search. We
have a query and a relevant passage. And
nowhere in this passage is the this is
about a book called Yubic by Philip K.
who's kind of a really crazy sci-fi
author who's always doing interesting
stuff.
Nowhere in here in you know what is the
book ubi about really the term book or
ubi doesn't really occur in this passage
at all
but through the question answering era
we we learned that we could train a
query encoder and a passage encoder to
take labeled passages and queries so
that they produce embeddings that
produce the right that say that they're
similar or not. So this is actually the
synopsis of the book UBIC, but no
keyword search solution without a lot of
work could easily come up with this as
the top result.
So that was sort of what we were all
amazed by in the late 2010s and this was
like state-of-the-art cool stuff. So now
anything that looks like the training
data of this model can be encoded can
have queries encoded or passage encoded
and probably do a pretty good job of
noticing when they when the passage is
the right answer for the query or when
it's not the right answer for the query
as long as it kind of looks like the
training data and that's something else
we'll talk about. We also had things
like extractive question answering where
we could within a larger body of text
take the begin and end of a question. So
this question is like what are
minimalist running shoes? We can do
things like pull out figure out the
probability that a token in a larger
document is the starting point of the
answer and when it might be the end
point of the answer. So we can do things
like uh pull out the just the little
sentence that directly answers our
question which helps us implement things
like answer boxes when we need to pull
out a snippet of what the right answer
is. So we were like in the late 2010s we
were really excited about this kind of
stuff and it really took off. So we
built a model for every data type that
you can imagine. You can go on hugging
face and get a an embedding model
trained on just about any kind of data
that looks kind of like your data and it
will probably do a pretty good job of do
of getting the right sort of relevant
answers for the questions that you're
asking.
Uh here we've got a legal one, a medical
one, there's e-commerce ones. There's
embeddings for everything these days.
Now, the real thing that would happen is
that people would take an embedding. I'm
going to use an embedding.
And they would most people could easily
stand up an application that could use
the embedding, but very few actually did
the last 20% of fine-tuning it on their
data for a lot of reasons. For one, it's
actually really hard. Another major
reason is because training data is often
founded in being good at evaluating
search in particular. So there's like
evaluation data takes a lot of time and
effort to actually label something as
relevant or not. So this is sort of a
becomes a big stopping point for anyone
actually going and getting embedding to
and embedding to the next level just the
data science required to gather clean
and good training data. And so a lot of
people would be fine with an 80%
solution.
Um yeah very few actually evaluate even
fewer fine-tune. So you had all these
startups that were doing question
answering and maybe beginning to do rag
that were 80% search solutions that
worked great for some things and then
catastrophically failed at other things.
Uh but even that 80% was really
impressive and people were really
excited to use embeddings. And back in
the early 2020s, late 20110s, if you
wanted to take one of these new
embedding models and deploy it somewhere
in a large scale set of infrastructure,
you didn't have a lot of options. I
remember back then there were libraries
like Annoy. People might remember that
there were the beginnings of vector
databases. People would deploy some of
the vector index libraries into a docker
container and kind of get by with that
or they'd reank the results from your
these are your traditional search
engines like elastic search or solar
lucine they might reank what comes the
lexical candidates based on embedding
similarity
um but to do actual embedding retrieval
wasn't really an option with the
traditional search indices
so you kind of had this parallel path
where everyone was getting excited about
taking these embedding settings down and
standing something up really quickly
where we had the rocket ship of vector
databases where people some people may
be frustrated with the traditional
search world got uh really excited and
said you know what this is a database
this is a data structures problem it's
really cool and fun and interesting and
there are entire systems now that are
just started out as we would call them
vector databases increasingly they're
just adding other types of indices like
full text search uh that really help
take the hugging face batteries and
shove them into something that's going
to really power them at high scale.
And so you just had a huge amount of
search startups that were literally just
I can download a model from Hugging
Face. I can index your data and I can
help you discover stuff.
And that sets us up for what happens
next. The next thing that happens out of
the question answering era is this
really cleanly evolves. It's almost like
the kindling and the fuel. It's like
we're out there with the with a dry with
a forest that's dry. It's really windy.
Um and all of a sudden there's a spark
and all the ingredients came together of
having mature vector databases having
hugging face with embeddings and chat
GPT dropped and the first thing that we
noticed with chat GPT is it immediately
hallucinates right LLM's hallucinate.
If I I actually did this recently.
I actually I think I might have asked it
not to search asked chat GPT not to
search and asked it to give me blog
articles that I wrote. BM25 posts by
Doug Turble and I got these things that
seem like something I would write, but I
never wrote any of this. I don't have I
don't have blog posts of this uh of
these titles. Some are like, but they're
they're things that are reasonably
associated with me.
Of course, um what people realize is
pretty quickly if I just took that that
prompt, that question I'm asking, and I
appended to it, it's like here, give me
BM25 blog post, and oh, by the way,
here's a list to help you. It would
nicely use this context, these search
results that we've appended. The Lab
probably doesn't even know that they're
search results. They're just extra
context and it could more accurately
answer the question. So now these are
blog posts that I have actually written.
So this is like the old school rag that
we used to do 2023 into 2024.
And of course this to most people
looks exactly like what we were talking
about. The first assumption is I'm going
to take a prompt. I'm going to have an
LLM that helps me write queries. It's
going to ask questions of this index.
The index is going to come back with
answers and help the LM person. So the
vast majority of the people getting into
the space and many folks on here may may
uh may be among them were getting into
the space finding embeddings from
hugging face shoveling them into your
the vector database of choice and just
going to town and getting a pretty good
80% solution rag solution right
and we also knew we figured out that to
preserve for for several reasons one
because They embed better into more
meaningful answers if we just chunk up
our larger content into smaller pieces
and they save Lon context that it makes
sense to chunk them into answers or
passages and we'd embed both of them.
And it sort of felt like if you saw this
to a lot of people it just search was
solved, right? This was all you had to
do if you had a good enough embedding.
If you had chunks broken down um and you
had good questions coming in, there
really shouldn't be any reason you can't
answer every question that an LLM has.
That's the that's the theory at least.
Well, the first chip in this that breaks
down is of course embeddings never 100%
fit. Even if you fine-tune them on your
data, you're still going to encounter
queries that are novel and new, users
are going to change how they're
searching. But for the most people,
they're not fine-tuning. They're taking
something that works 80% of the time,
and they're uh there there's this last
20% that actually that that doesn't
necessarily work well with our uh
against the embedding model. Maybe we
took some medical records embedding
model, but because of our location or
our specialty in medicine,
our queries look just and our data look
just slightly different than what the
model was trained on. And uh nine times
out of 10 teams that do this, they don't
necessarily have an ability to just take
down fine-tune some data. They don't
have the uh they're not they don't have
good enough training data to do that.
they don't have the data science
capability to do that. It's a pretty big
cliff to figure out how to fine-tune it.
So, you're left with this awkward
overlap of something that works 80% of
the time but not not the other 20% of
the time.
So, for those cases and for other cases,
we have BM25 as well, which is I like to
think of it as a fairly defensible
understandable ranking. Uh here we're
just sort of counting and weighing
things by their term importance. What
are good baby names? Name is sort of
moderately important. What is not that
important to this? Baby may be more
important and so on. And people who may
know BM25 and definitely if you don't
come to my class on it, but it's
literally just defensible lexical
scoring to kind of give you reasonable
results.
And the great thing about it is it's not
really trained on anything. it just sort
of works for just about anything with
term matches. So it's a lowest common
denominator really fast and it just
works um for a broad case of use cases
whereas that embedding model is going to
be very tailored so maybe even overfit
to a specific set of training data.
So we add it to the stack
and we're pretty sure it's solved again.
But then we realized that that's not
enough too because just getting the top
vector embeddings or the top BM25
results is not enough. Uh those can be
fairly inefficient retrievers.
Sometimes there's actually some
structure to our data and we to get good
candidates for our our LM we need to
work with that structure not against it.
So we realize that we can add content
understanding maybe tag with a stock
ticker also query understanding there's
there's a stock ticker XYZ here for
earnings report from XYZ
and we filter our indices maybe down to
get to those candidates that are pretty
you know more accurately closer to what
we want and we also realize things like
there are more recent reports that we uh
you know we care about more recent
things then older things and these other
bits of like metadata kinds of filtering
that sometimes are expressed in the
query and in the end we've just
recreated basically the traditional
uh yeah I am I think I'm sharing the
slides
uh sorry we're basically recreating the
traditional query understanding um stack
we're basically recreating what searches
always looked like. So there's really
strong continuity between this question
answering era and the classic rag era.
Uh even though a lot of consultants like
me, a lot of startups have made a lot of
uh you know made made a lot of noise
about rag and everything, a lot of that
noise honestly was just teaching people
how search normally works and the pieces
that go into it where we have multiple
retrievers, we have career understanding
going in trying to filter things and we
have uh re-ranking maybe coming out and
so on. it starts to just look very
similar.
But what I want to emphasize is getting
into the agentic era is actually a much
more dramatic break from this older
school way of thinking about search for
one or two decades that we've we've been
doing.
So uh and I'll talk about that uh that's
what we're going to talk about for the
rest of today.
The first in the armor came around
with structured outputs. So it used to
be that we would beg an LLM to produce
valid JSON.
We might say uh we might say, "Hey, can
you take this query and please pretty
please get the color or the stock ticker
or some bit of metadata out of this
query or this bit of content and please
pretty please format it in such a way
that
uh corresponds to how we think about
things. And please pretty please only
return legal colors or stock tickers or
whatever other bit of metadata that uh
that exists.
But now with structured outputs, we
basically constrain the schema that the
outputs of an LLM can be. We force it to
obey a pyantic schema which is uh or a
JSON schema.
It must it's basically a typed
interaction now. It's not just a uh not
just a natural language bit of text that
comes out. So we say give me BM25 post
by Doug Turbo. Well maybe our stuff
we've tagged them with topics and
authors. Um this doesn't look like a
natural language question. It looks like
a almost looks more like what you would
do a SQL. You could imagine a select
star where topic equals BM25 and author
equals Doug Turbo.
So it's a this becomes a specification
and then you start to realize wait all
those years before we've been obsessing
about natural language question
answering when now with structured
outputs we're we're getting away from
the unstructured perspective and getting
more and more to a structured
perspective.
And just to give you a sense of what
this looks like, uh I don't know why
that says color. That should say stock
tickers.
And I like to live edit slides.
So let's do that right now. Yeah. So
should be stock tickers. And we can say
this is uh how the output that an LLM
should produce. We can say something
like you're a helpful assistant that
helps create search queries. Jer query
for earnings report XYZ stock. And it's
going to return something of this of the
schema before. It's going to return a
stock query schema. And let's edit that
too.
So
that's going to let that basically turns
the LM and the L. This is the LM in rag.
This is the LM that's just forming a
query that we're going to then go and
append to our main context. This
basically turns it entirely into a
structured interaction and has nothing
to do with natural language search that
might use vector embeddings and all
kinds of stuff.
So that's the first thing that happens.
The next thing that happens is um so
before if I do this I can still follow
the same flow where I give the LM a
prompt and a bunch of context that
should help it answer the question even
if this quer this was interpreted as a
structured uh question on the side on
the left
there might there's usually an LM that's
helping to turn the user's prompt into a
query but it does the the LLM that's
answering the question right here
doesn't know it's participating in a
search.
Well, now the next evolution becomes
tool calling. So with tool calling, LLMs
know that they're searching. Um, so give
me BM25 posts of Doug Turnbull
and an agent when it's using tools can
will speak in a same typed schema full
language to do things like go to topic
BM25 author Doug triple.
So, this is starting to make my point of
like all that stuff that we've done with
classic rag where we've chunked data,
we've built embeddings, all of that was
tailored towards an embedding retrieval
and natural language question answering
paradigm.
This is starting to look like a
completely different paradigm. And it's
not clear to me if you're starting out
as doing some kind of quoteunquote rag
system that you should do the chunking
or embedding retrieval. You may be
better off using uh using a completely
different system.
Yeah. And classic this is basically the
same point. Classic rag focus natural
language search tool calling. You can
focus you can do natural language
search. There's nothing stopping you.
But you can just as easily use the
structure imbued in the data itself.
And if you think about this further,
we used to spend like people say, well,
my data is not very structured. It's not
very clean, blah blah blah. And we used
to spend
there were entire startups that would
spend years building PhD level
ways of taking a specific content type
like patents or earning reports, blog
posts or jobs and just enriching them
with structure. Well, now if you know
what you're doing, you can have an LLM
sit on your content,
add the structure that's needed to
answer the questions that your agent
needs to have answered, and then your
agent can more or less generate queries
now that are in a more structured kind
of vocabulary that look more like
something like this, what of the
information that's needed.
And when you have a query that's a bit
more like a specification of metadata
that looks more like metadata similarity
like this is now I'm going to sorry I
keep switching domains but here we're we
have a query for crimson suede couch.
Well crimson is a type of red suede is a
material couch is this material is this
type of couch. And if we look over our
corpus, you can see some things in this
metadata language that are much clearly
clearly much more similar to these
attributes than other things. So you
might say red is obviously a direct
match. Pink we might consider a match
but maybe ranked lower. You can decide
whether you want to include imitation
leather or not. You start to think about
these things as a simil as a similarity
over metadata.
not anything to do with with uh
traditional embeddings or or lexical
retrieval BM25.
And I'm not saying this because you
should never use BM25 or embeddings, but
I'm just saying what I'm really getting
at is that LLM, it has never been
cheaper to
turn your unstructured data into
structured data and turn your queries
and prompts into structured tool calls.
It's never been easier or cheaper to do
that and doing that will only make the
other kinds of ranking you use whether
it's embedded if you are using chunks or
BM25 or something like that uh will only
make that more effective and to me this
you know when I go to work with teams
this is one of the biggest blind spots
and opportunities that people have when
it comes to search and rag is they've
spent a lot of time focused on data
modeling on the the chunking and
embedding and almost no time on trying
to enrich the data and the queries with
the metadata needed to actually get down
to what's really important and make
those other ranking systems work. Those
other maybe fuzzier in some ways
probabilistic ranking systems work more
effectively.
Okay, so that's these two things. Maybe
the the query understanding that I think
that's more and more obvious to people
that we ls do a good job of that with
prompts now. We don't need to build that
in our search stack necessarily.
The second point of tools, I feel like
it's becoming clear to people that maybe
people aren't necessarily aware of just
how powerful that is in terms of uh
being able to interact with our data in
a more structured fashion.
And then finally we have uh reasoning
itself. So reasoning once a agent
executes a tool in this case searching
on its own behalf and it gets a response
we can it can analyze that response and
act and think like hm the user searched
for BM25 but the keyword search didn't
find what we needed let's be more
specific so we have we changed the topic
to BM25 and author Doug Turbo and so on
and so a lot of how we build search is
how these days in Agentic Search and why
this is such a clean break with the past
is trying to encourage agents to think
and reason and use its tools more
effectively as much it as it is about
the retrieval quality and all those
other good things.
Um and you can see this in the data. So
if you have uh this is on there's a
notebook link here I definitely will
share out
but uh if you just take a set of tools
you have a BM25 tool you have embeddings
tool uh that might be a poor embedded
model for this and over some this is
just a standard e-commerce data set you
can see just BM25 just adding reasoning
makes makes relevant makes search better
goes from 0.52 to 0.58
and DCG. Same thing with uh embeddings
gets a little better. And then if you
give it both, it gets even better. So
you get a pretty significant like 10%
bump just by like hey
uh agent here's some dumb tools. Try to
find the most relevant results for these
queries. But this is uh using just GPT5
and like whatever medium level of
reasoning. So, I'm not saying this to
necessarily for you to go and inject
GPT5 on into your search stack, but just
be aware that the other thing that's
happening, and I'll talk about this
later, is that
people are working on cheaper reasoning
models that can plug into a search stack
and maybe could work on more traditional
search queries. companies like SID, um I
know Chroma has had a model come out
recently and those are going to probably
really change how we think about this
stuff even more add sort of fuel to this
fire.
So if we're giving all the we're just
throwing tools and we're giving lots of
options to the LLM to filter on metadata
and the agent to filter on metadata,
does retrieval not even matter anymore?
Well, uh I
luckily someone today actually shared
this paper with me and I think it's
really enlightening because it does show
that retrieval tool quality does matter.
Uh Leo Bosoff shared this with me on
LinkedIn. And what's interesting to me
is a the first thing to realize is this
is GPT OSS 20B. So it's a small model.
It's not it's a model you can run on a
laptop.
um off the bat just with BM25
really uh here's BM25 on passage
similarity here's BM25 on document
the other thing to realize browse comp
plus is a pretty challenging agentic
deep research metric
it tries to confuse an agent tries to
throw all kinds of weird curve balls at
an agent to for and it's has all these
tasks that basically
tell the agent to find some complicated
information out there.
Well, what was impressive to me is and I
do agree that obviously better
retrievers and just from before how I
was like layer on different tools does
help the agent perform better, but what
the other thing the thing that's
striking to me most of all is just these
um really simple retrievers an agent
does surprisingly well.
So, I'm not saying you shouldn't care
about your retrieval tool quality, but I
am saying that there's uh as much
there's as much work to do in agent and
harness design and the skills that skill
design and all those things that we put
on that side of the equation as we do on
the retrieval tool side of the equation.
And really what this is doing, we we'll
we look at the entire thing. What we're
really doing um is we're unbundling the
big search stack that I showed before.
So this is really I think what's
interesting about agentic search is you
can optionally unbundle and just let the
agent drive all of the pieces. So query
understanding just becomes part of the
LM.
We have search tools. Those just become
the retrieval arms, the retrieval
sources.
We have the LLM's own evaluation. That's
kind of a reranker.
You can plug into these. Honestly, the
query formulation should have an arrow,
too. You can plug stuff in here like the
evaluation to external judges or
reankers that can help figure these
things out.
And what we're really doing is bringing
everything into the reasoning loop and
helping an agent think through how it
should be using its retrieval tools to
pull back relevant results.
And this is why you're seeing people
talk about things like, well, let me
just give let me just build search with
GP. Let me just put a bunch of markdown
files on the file system. Maybe they're
organized somewhat and build search with
GRP and the agent will figure out how to
find things through regular expressions
because we have this reasoning loop and
this sort of the semantic part basically
becomes part of the LM and not part of
the embeddings.
Yeah. So LMS become the semantic layer
and they become the eval ranking layer.
Um, and it's getting to the point where
instead of the tuning where we're
actually changing things is we're not
necessarily always going to be changing
retrieval tools and and the stuff around
the agent, but the models themselves are
getting faster and more focused on
search. There are startups like SID like
I said who this is their entire thing is
focusing on this agentic search task.
So there is this new problem that we
have this proliferation of options now.
So if you do everything I just said and
you throw the kitchen sink at an L at an
agent,
what I've done is actually give you a
different kind of problem.
And it's kind of like the curse of
dimensionality
because an agent coming into the world,
remember agents when they start a task,
they're kind of they start with their
encyclopedic of knowledge of the world
with very little context of what what uh
what's it's done before. It has no what
it's done before. It just starts formed
with the encyclopedia of all knowledge.
Well, um, an LLM has to play with all of
these widgets and gizmos and things that
we've given these filters and maybe it
should use correct for one thing or BM25
for another. So, it's going to burn a
lot of tokens doing that. So, that's the
first thing that that you see when you
start to play with this. And what I see
is that a few years ago when people were
doing rag startups,
I think it was reasonable to say, "Oh,
it's silly because they're just sort of
like throwing some embedding somewhere
and it sort of kind of works but not
really." This is now a bit of where
startups are
finding themselves a little bit in a
corner with this stuff and where maybe
if you go too far in this extreme, you
might run into trouble.
But there's mitigation. Of course, we
can mitigate this on the retrieval side
by making it smarter and more
deterministic.
We all know that. But I think what's
also interesting from this perspective
is answering building these harnesses in
the same way we build our coding
harnesses.
So in clawed code or something when we
have this challenge of wow we have an
entire operating system full of commands
a command line tool for everything and a
huge codebase and we need to tailor it
to solving a specific type of problem.
We create skills. So we say oh if you
want to figure out how an elastic search
cluster is structured you go and you go
to cat indices and you do all these
things and uh this is the step-by-step
procedure you should run so you're not
wasting context doing trial and error a
million things
and I think the same thing can be true
of search as well. We have skills. I've
just came from a plan, a client that
called this a query plan, which I think
is also really an interesting idea. We
can have skills for solving specific
problems like when searching for company
financial data, use the filter report
type earnings. Might say ignore the
other filters and use the BM25 search.
So this might encompass a large set of
search problems that don't that
basically avoid wasting a lot of context
iterating and trying these different
tools that we know won't necessarily get
to a good outcome.
So that's the first thing.
The other challenge comes when with
guiding reasoning itself and this is
also something we do with coding agents.
So uh we this comes up in like
Carpathy's auto research. This comes up
in coding tools where a lot of what how
you get these really autonomous agents
how you get really good work out of them
is you and really deter more
deterministic work is you build good
guard rails around them. So LLMs will
kind of throw spaghetti at a wall and I
see this with query expansion too. uh if
I just let it go and give it a lot of
search tools, it'll try different
queries without necessarily rhyme or
reason. Um or at least not clear rhyme
or reason. Um and it might do a decent
job,
but we can also have, and I sort of
alluded to this before, we can also have
a hook. I like to call it a hook because
that's often what we refer to it in a
coding agent that programmatically
checks the results that came out of the
agent. And if something is off or it
doesn't pass the smell smell test or
there's actually a sub aent, maybe a
cheaper sub agent that's really good at
evaluating search results, it can tell
the agent to uh try again. And the agent
can go, "Oh, okay. Well, actually, wow,
that assumption I made is not correct.
Let me go and change how I'm going to
use these different uh search tools."
Um,
and so you end up with these three
ingredients that you trade off of when
you're building agentic search. You have
hooks that sort of like programmatic
guardrails that steer the agent. You
have skills that help the agent. So
hooks are reactive. Skills are
proactive. Both hooks steer an agent
towards the right answer by looking at
what it's done and correcting it. skills
proactively guide the agent to what uh
what should be done. And then of course
you have retrieval which are meant to
fulfill the promise in some ways fulfill
the promise the different skills that
talk about it are are making like if I
do filter on this will it actually
filter on this? If I uh if I search this
way will the results make sense?
So the retrieval needs to make sure that
the that the uh actual tools are
understandable in terms of what it's
what that the skills are telling it it
should do.
And you have naive retrieval. These are
all the people building search with GP.
But what they're really doing is they're
putting all their complexity into hooks
and skills. So they uh anyone building
you know using open claw or something
like that what they're really doing that
open claw is almost this like operating
system for being able to use skills and
to accomplish any number of tasks uh
sometimes correctly and sometimes
deleting all your email. But the
emphasis in the design there will be
people will talk about the skills
they're using and maybe the constraints
and programmatic hooks they're putting
around the agent itself to prevent it
from going off the rails.
The other end of the spectrum and if
you're chat GPT or your Google or you're
anthropic you live more in this world
you although recently I saw Anthropic
did post something about how they do
some post-processing of search results
that I thought was interesting.
So you have hooks and skills
sort of existing but they're much
lighter in this context
but we have a strong retrieval tool that
we trust more. So we trust OpenAI can
trust Google or Bing to actually do give
reasonable answers and do a good job to
to answer the question.
And sometimes the right answer where to
invest may depend entirely on just your
team's comfort. Like maybe you work at a
search team and you are actually
comfortable building a good retriever,
but a lot of people might be able to
start with hooks and skills and
gradually build up the complexity of the
retriever as they're noticing tokens
wasted and these kinds of things.
Yeah.
Yeah. So just repeating what hooks do
sort of checking sanity checking results
or even even evaluating results
um retrieval fulfills a good contract
and skills guiding in specific
situations.
So I want to stop or conclude and then
I'll answer some questions what you
should do. I don't think you where I see
people
messing up is they'll say oh we need to
build rag that means we must build chunk
and embeddings
and so they'll take 6 months and build
this really complicated project of we
must have this chunkable index of
knowledge.
I actually think that's usually a
mistake because it's a very high-scale
problem. It's a lot of infrastructure.
it's not clear you're going to need it.
I think it's better to just expose some
tools and get started and ship a problem
sooner and see where the gaps are before
going to the next level. Maybe you do
need to do chunking and and that kind of
thing. But maybe there are other ways
that already exist in your data that
expose that knowledge in a different way
that speaks in a not a natural language
way of thinking about the data, but a
more metadata first way of thinking
about the data.
I also think it's reasonable to if
you're especially if you're not if
you're not familiar with retrieval, but
you're more comfortable with AI and
agents, you can focus on the harness and
the skills, then get to the retrieval
part later.
Eventually, it's going to matter.
Eventually, GP is going to not s be able
to search uh billions of documents. Uh
but you'll get there when you get there.
And just starting with something you can
ship sooner is is the most important
thing.
Yeah. Um, and each of these areas has
very clear next steps of what to do.
So, with that, I will just stop and see
if folks have any questions or
disagreements. I know it's sort of like
this is very hot take. And if this topic
interests you and you want to learn more
about Agentic Search, there is, like I
said, there's a discount code. Rag is
dead. Uh, which is a joke. It's rag's
not really dead. And uh you can go to
softwaremaven.com software cheat if you
want to hang up with me. So yeah, I'll
stop there. Any questions,
but oh there are some questions in the
um in the chat. Let me get to those. So
C Frier Frier asks, "What do you think
about recursive language models? a call
loop inside a ripple with API to a Vespa
server andor another database. So um
I've had a lot of luck with recursive
language models. I so recursive language
model the purest form of it is instead
of giving a tool to a search system you
gave just a tool that is a Python
ripple. In some ways it's like having a
tool to bash that can call GP and
explore the file system except with on
the Python ripple usually the context is
defined to be a variable in the in the
ripple itself. So in the Python process
itself
and but the recursive part is
interesting because you also add to that
Python environment a function that can
then itself call an LLM to do certain
tasks. It works really well. The main
challenge is gets back to my skills
discussion before. If you want the LLM
to do something smart if with that uh
with that um function that calls an LLM,
if you want the agent to do something
smart with that function, that recursing
function. I find you have to be specific
about what you want it to do with it.
Like understand cruise, try to
understand cruise with it. You have to
give it kind of more careful examples.
And this is generally true of agents and
LMS. It's like you kind of need to steer
them a bit about what you expect when
you give them something really
open-ended like that.
Um, Juan Pablo, yes, doesn't this drive
the cost of search way up? Assume the
agent has to go over and over multiple
search cycles to get the results. I
Yeah, I don't want to deemphasize that
is a trade-off. So, that is something
you have to reckon with. So some people
will say um it doesn't some people will
be happy about it because they get some
good results quickly. They're able to
ship something sooner and then they'll
come back and iterate on it. Um other
people will say no I need to stop and
think about my retrieval to be able to
tolerate the cost of these things. Uh
and it sort of also depends on where
you're starting. If you're starting in a
ragl like environment, um that is uh you
may already have a few rounds of tool
calling and things like this. Uh so you
really have to measure where the
trade-offs are.
Uh Anna asks, I've heard that the search
functionality in claude co-work
is distinctly different from rag. Could
you please elaborate on this? My
understanding, I don't know if this the
same as claude code, but they definitely
don't have the classic chunking vector
database setup. I think their search
setup is um well in code there's this
concept of a trigram index where you uh
makes it easier to search like basically
search within strings.
So they care more about that kind of
thing and I think they just use a lot of
file system tools. Uh but don't quote me
on that. I don't know if if anyone else
has information on that please
u please mention please bring that up.
So uh Shishir asks how does one budget
for latencies on repeated calls? Um
usually
that's a great question.
I don't know quite what you mean by
budget latencies, but in my experience,
depending on the situation,
users seem we're in a phase right now
where users are comfortable with a
degree of latency to get good answers
back in a in a chat and rag context.
I think chat GPT has trained people to
expect thinking and those kinds of
things.
So, um, typically I haven't seen too
much of an option, too much of a
problem.
I think that's it's interesting though
to, uh, to basically to go and
look at the developments that are
happening where people are looking at
cheaper models or trying to train
cheaper models that only focus on the
search part of the equation.
Uh Anna asks
Anna asks uh what how do you vet
how do you how are you vetting the
hugging face models? So I vet hugging
face models the same way I vet any
search
solution. I would need to have some way
of evaluating their quality in terms of
question. So there's this concept in
search called a judgment list and I'll
pull that up. Whoops. What is a judgment
list?
Um
that is often labeled sometimes
depending on your situation might be
derived from clickstream data. really I
there are classic evaluation metrics in
question answering that basically you
have a evaluation set you know the right
answer and you're trying to see how good
the retriever is at surfacing the right
answer so you see how how far up in the
ranking the right answer shows up and I
wouldn't it's I I don't think you can
get away from doing that on your own
data and comparing it to uh to and just
comparing different models using your
own data and honestly I actually
uh gave a talk entirely about this with
Hamill Hussein that he just posted on
LinkedIn
and I'll have to I'll have to find it
but uh if I could find it.
It's not here but there is a talk I
think it's like
how to debug rag Doug Turnpool. Let's
see.
Yeah, here we go.
Uh, if you're interested in in the
evaluation topic of this top of this,
definitely check it out.
Any other questions?
Yeah, John, good to see you. Thank you.
And definitely come to my training if
this topic interests you. I think uh I
think you'll get a lot out of it. I
got a I think a lot of people got a
really a lot of information out of it
from things like recursive language
models to uh to agentic search harnesses
to building good retrievers for agentic
search.
Uh yeah, Deb asks how LM like claude
agentic SC perform trade-off between
skill tool calling hooks between all the
iterations for optimal retrieval
results. Do traditional Python data
structures?
I actually don't know
for a trade-off between skilled tool
calling. Oh,
I think something so the the third the
fourth thing that's I'm not mentioning
in here in this talk. there's so much to
talk about is a be in part because it
applies very specifically to coding and
it applies very specifically to I would
say a specific kind of search like web
search but uh a lot of it just has to do
with training data like something like
uh some something like cloud code can do
a lot through training data or or has a
lot of training data that guides it on
like on using GP or exploring a file
system. So that's one reason that people
are like, "Hey, I'll just use Gret for
my search because there are so many
examples, a lot of it driven from actual
use, use your telemetry
that help it get help search more
efficiently in a file system. So uh
that's why like cloud code doesn't
necessarily need
um need to need doesn't necessarily need
to figure out like how to how to like do
a uh sophisticated search. It doesn't
need guidance on that. It's like been
really baked into his training data.
Cool.
All right. Well, that was great. I hope
everyone had a good time. So, definitely
either come check out my class or I'll
see you next week as I chat with Joe
Christian.
All right, take care everyone.